June 16, 2012
Voting Begins in Egypt’s Presidential Runoff Election
By DAVID D. KIRKPATRICK and KAREEM FAHIM



CAIRO — Voters cast ballots on Saturday for the first competitively elected leader in Egypt’s history, even as a last-minute grab for power by its ruling generals raised questions about whether the election would be a milestone in the transition to democracy or a facade obscuring the re-emergence of the old order.        

Voters faced a stark choice between two faces of the past: Ahmed Shafik, a former air force general and stalwart of former President Hosni Mubarak who promised to restore order and thwart the rise of an Islamist theocracy, or Mohamed Morsi, a veteran of the once-outlawed Muslim Brotherhood campaigning as a defender of the revolution against a return of the Mubarak-era autocracy.        

The ruling military council that took power after Mr. Mubarak’s ouster 16 months ago had pledged that this weekend’s two-day presidential runoff would be the final step in the transition to civilian government before the generals were to cede power.        

The day before the vote, however, they dissolved the democratically elected, Islamist-led Parliament that had been the chief accomplishment of the revolt so far. Acting on a rushed ruling by a court of Mubarak-appointed judges, they declared they would be the sole lawmakers, even after a new president is elected. And they began drawing up a new interim constitution that would define the power of the president whom voters were choosing on Saturday.        

“This is the end stage of the whole transition,” said Mahmoud Ismail, 27, a political activist in the Nile Delta who said he would vote for Mr. Morsi. “To be or not to be.”        

The military’s seizure of Parliament precluded the possibility of the Islamists of the Muslim Brotherhood taking control of both the legislature and the presidency. Now, if Mr. Morsi wins, he will face a prolonged struggle for power against the generals, while Mr. Shafik — who had long been considered one of Mr. Mubarak’s likely successors — could emerge as a new military-backed strongman unrestrained by either a constitution or Parliament.        

Mr. Shafik, Mr. Mubarak’s last prime minister, has made no public comment on the dissolution of Parliament. He cast his ballot on Saturday in the style of his former boss, arriving at a polling place in an upscale suburb surrounded by a heavy guard of military and police officers. The lines were pushed aside and guards immediately closed the facility for his private use.        

Crowds of his supporters were waiting both inside and outside the polling place. “The Brotherhood is dissolved,” they chanted, cheering at the dissolution of the Brotherhood-led Parliament. State media reported that a cameraman in a military vehicle filmed Mr. Shafik’s trip to the ballot box, apparently to preserve it for posterity.        

Mr. Morsi of the Muslim Brotherhood sought Saturday to cast the election as the last chance to beat back the full revival of the Mubarak government. He waited in line for more than two hours in the nearly 100-degree heat to cast his vote in the Nile Delta town of Zagazig, where he used to teach engineering. “God is great,” a throng of supporters cried as he emerged, and he shouted over them to salute those killed while demonstrating against Mr. Mubarak.        

“Today is the day of the martyrs,” he declared. “There is no place at all for Mubarak’s helpers.”        

Across Egypt, the streets were calm, but enthusiasm was low and turnout had fallen sharply from the first round.        

The two candidates, however, revved up the battle-tested political machines that helped them advance past last month’s first round of voting. Mr. Morsi turned to the Brotherhood’s system of local cells and charities built over 84 years of preaching and politics. Mr. Shafik, who surged to roughly tie Mr. Morsi in the first round of voting, scarcely a month after he announced his campaign, relied instead on the network of local power brokers, including retired army officers and former leaders in Mr. Mubarak’s defunct ruling party.        


David D. Kirkpatrick reported from Cairo, and Kareem Fahim from Menoufia, Egypt. Mayy El Sheikh contributed reporting from Cairo, and Dina Salah Amer and Liam Stack from Menoufia.

 
 


This article has been revised to reflect the following correction:
Correction: June 16, 2012
An earlier version of a picture caption in a home page slide show appearing with this article incorrectly referred to Ahmed Shafik as a veteran of Ehud Mubarak’s regime. He was an official in the government of Egypt’s former president, Hosni Mubarak.



